# Portfolio Hedging Using VIX Options

A variety of strategies can provide capital protection for asset-based portfolios; however, these strategies produce considerable negative excess returns during up-trending markets, and this would have been cost-prohibitive over the past several years. But one interesting academic paper offers hope for an interesting, cost-effective hedging strategy. The strategy uses option on VIX as the VIX Index is not directly investable. To determine the optimal cost-effective placement of VIX calls to protect against tail risk, the strategy is systematically purchasing one-month, two-month, three-month and four-month VIX call options each month. During tail events, a portfolio manager may choose to monetize not only the front-month contracts but all contracts held in the ladder because the mark-to-market values of all the contracts had increased. The strategy invests 25 basis points (bsp) in the desired VIX call option (per each month) only during months when VIX is not extremely high or low. This approach reduces the cost of hedging in nonevent periods.

## Fundamental reason
Volatility tends to cluster and mean-revert. Allocation of fixed percentage per month allows more options to be purchased when VIX is below the mean and fewer options to be purchased when VIX is above the mean. The strategy is trying to determine the optimal moneyness, expiry and minimal capital requirement within a portfolio framework. A call options are bought only when the VIX Index is between 15% and 50%. Therefore the investor is not buying the options which he would probably not need so he is not overpaying them. 

## Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of a stock/bond portfolio with a proportion of 60-percent stocks and 40-percent bonds. Stocks are represented by the SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust (SPY) and bonds by the iShares 7-10 Year Treasury Bond ETF (IEF). The strategy firstly invests 0-100 basis points (bsp) in the desired VIX call option, then allocates 60 percent of the portfolio to the SPY and the remaining 40 percent to the IEF. The option is bought at the level of 135% of the moneyness of the underlying VIX futures price. The strategy is systematically purchasing an equal amount in one-month, two-month, three-month and four-month VIX call options on VIX futures. If the VIX Index is between 15 and 30, the weight of VIX calls in the portfolio is 1%. If the VIX Index is between 30 and 50, the weight in the portfolio is 0,5%. If the VIX Index is over 50 or under 15, then the weight of options in the portfolio is 0%. Each month, on the day before expiration, the options are rolled to the appropriate expiry. VIX call options are purchased at the offer and sold at the bid to keep the assumptions conservative. The options are held to maturity and closed the Tuesday afternoon before the Wednesday morning of VIX futures and options expiration. If the contracts have any intrinsic value, they are sold at the bid price, and the cash is used at the end of the month to rebalance the stock/bond portion of the portfolio.

## Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - The proposed strategy is built especially for downside protection used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.

## Source paper
Paoloni: A Study in Portfolio DIversification Using VIX Options

https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2792358

*Abstract*  
The search for dependable, low-cost portfolio tail protection or hedge from exogenous events such as the 1987 crash, the 2000 dot-com bubble, the 2008 credit crisis and the 2011 European crisis continues. This study assesses the performance of a systematic VIX call buying strategy with a defined cost to hedge an equity portfolio from systemic risk. A portfolio manager must weigh these costs against those of hedging strategiesthat have potentially undefinable costs, for example, protective puts or shorting equity index futures. The analysis shows that a passive allocation to VIX calls has proven effective in large drawdown periods and can be accomplished by spending a relatively small defined percentage of capital when the hedge is not needed. The study applies a set of fixed rules to empirical data with the goal of optimizing ex-post the moneyness and expiry of VIX call options over the period studied. For the period of analysis, the systematic purchase of properly placed VIX calls tends to provide sufficient protection in tail risk events for minimal cost when hedging is not needed.

## Running the code
Copy the contents of `HedgingUsingVIXOptions.py` into Quantconnect. Fill in the redacted part of the code and run a backtest. Checking the [Quantconnect documentation](https://www.quantconnect.com/docs/v2/) is the best way to familiarise yourself with the syntax
